# Functional glucocorticoid receptors in mature sperm contribute to the transmission of trauma effects across generations


Excessive stress influences disease risk not only within, but also across generations. Gene regulatory adaptation to stress is in part mediated by the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), one of the main stress hormone receptors. But it remains unclear, whether GR or its epigenetic signature in the transcriptionally silent male germline is directly involved in conveying stress experiences intergenerationally. Here, we demonstrate that GR does play a role in this process. Using biochemistry, omics and genetic labelling approaches, we find that GR is present in mature sperm at specific functional loci, not reflecting prior transcription, that this signature is partially retained in the early embryo, and that GR is transmitted during fertilization. A combination of genetic and protein level manipulations reveals an instructive role of GR during spermatogenesis, as well as relevance of inherited signatures and protein during early embryonic transcription. Lastly, we show in a mouse model of acute traumatic stress that circulating paternal glucocorticoid levels, offspring early embryonic gene expression and behavior are altered and that this can be reversed by depletion of paternal sperm GR protein via proteolysis targeting chimera. Our results provide a sound mechanistic basis for inheritance of the impact of stress, with putative relevance for the transmission of neuropsychiatric disease risk.   

Sequencing data generated in this manuscript are submitted to the National Center for Biotechnology Information Gene Expression Omnibus repository under accession number GSE290800.

GitHub repository includes markdown for figure generation as well as folder structure, which enables the same figure generation.
